Please help with verifying or updating older sections of this article.At least some were last verified forversion1.25.

Propercolonizationcan provide many benefits for a colonizing nation. Determining where to colonize for the greatest benefit is usually dependent on two factors, firstly, the location of the colonizing nation's main trading port, and secondly, the location of said nation in relation to Europe, where most Institutions spawns.

Historically, it was five powerful western European nations that worked to create vast and profitable empires overseas:Spain,Portugal,France,Great Britain, and theNetherlandseven if many other nations also had colonies overseas. In EU4 however, any nation can create a vast colonial empire with proper planning.

### Contents

- 1Basic strategy
- 2Merchants
- 3Institutions3.1Island hopping
- 3.1Island hopping
- 4The Random New World
- 5Colonization strategies by technology group5.1Western technology nations5.2Eastern and Anatolian nations5.3Muslim nations5.4Indian nations5.5Chinese nations and Steppe Hordes5.6Western, Eastern and Central African nations5.7Native North and South American nations
- 5.1Western technology nations
- 5.2Eastern and Anatolian nations
- 5.3Muslim nations
- 5.4Indian nations
- 5.5Chinese nations and Steppe Hordes
- 5.6Western, Eastern and Central African nations
- 5.7Native North and South American nations
### Basic strategy[edit|edit source]

In general, colonisation is far more profitable if a player can either eventually bringtrade valueback to their home node, or dominate one of the colonialtrade nodesand collect trade income there. With this in mind, some nations are much better positioned than others to take advantage of colonizable territory. To understand how to benefit from colonization, the player must look at thetrade map modeto understand how to bring trade value back home or to a trade node they can effectively collect at.

Example 1:Portugal's main trading port is in the Sevilla node. Sevilla connects directly to the Caribbean node in the New World, meaning that any trade value generated by colonized provinces in the Caribbean node can be pulled, with enoughtrade power, to the Sevilla node. As well, creating acolonial nationin the New World will provide 50% of that nation's trade power to Portugal, assisting in that process. Therefore, the Caribbean is an excellent place to colonize for Portugal. The Caribbean node also connects to many other colonizable nodes, such as Mexico, Rio Grande, and others.

Additionally, the Sevilla node connects directly to the Ivory Coast node. The Ivory Coast node has many colonizable provinces and trade value from many othertrade nodeswith colonizable provinces flows into this node, including Brazil, Cape of Good Hope, Zanzibar, Amazonas, and many others. Controlling the Ivory Coast node would be a great idea for Portugal as over time, the player will be able to colonize other provinces in more far-flung areas, and as long as the player controls trade power along the whole route, they will be able to direct lots of trade value back to Sevilla. Portugal can create atrade companyin Ivory Coast to assist with this.

However, trade value from the St. Lawrence, Ohio, Chesapeake, or Hudson's Bay nodescannotflow to Sevilla. It is impossible. This means that colonizing thesetrade nodesshould only be considered when all other eligible locations have been taken. Even if Portugal tookImportant Trade Centresaway from other colonizers, the only way to prevent trade value from reaching the nations in nodes such as English Channel would be for Portugal to have a merchantcollect tradein one of these nodes, which would damage the trade power in all of Portugal's other nodes.

Example 2:Veniceis aMerchant Republicwith strong trading ideas. However, by looking at the flow of trade worldwide, the player will see that the only New Worldtrade nodesthat caneverconnect to the Venice node are California, Mexico, and Rio Grande. Furthermore,Venicewould need to have trade power in several nodes that are largely owned by other countries, such as theMamluks(Alexandria),Ming(Hangzhou), andJapan(Nippon), before any significant amount of trade value could reach Venice.

Venice can eventually benefit from some trade company regions; if the player can control the Alexandria, Gulf of Aden, Coromandel and Bengal nodes via warfare, they can benefit from the colonization of Indonesia and even Australia. Due to their location, Venice will have a difficult time gaining colonial range to Indonesia regardless, until they can conquer the Horn of Africa.

An easier route to benefiting from colonization as Venice requires early expansion to the New World, so as to dominate one of the New Worldtrade nodessufficiently to collect trade profitably despite the penalty for collecting from a trade node away from the main trading port. While Venice starts at a disadvantage in this respect because of its further distance from the New World compared to European nations on the Atlantic seaboard, Venice can seek to capture or colonize a West African territory and use this as a platform from which to colonize the New World. With focused attention on colonization, Venice can then compete with other colonizing nations, but must collect trade income in a New World trade node, such as the Caribbean, given the low chance of controlling European trade nodes which connect efficiently to the Americas.

Note that any nation can move itsmain trading portto any other node where they have a province, even overseas. Before the player does this, they should ensure that they possess enough trade power in both the new home node, as well as upstream connected nodes, to make it worthwhile. Even so, the nation will still forfeit trade value generated in any nodes that do not connect to the new main trading port, which may include nodes where that nation has many developed provinces. In general, a nation should have its main trading port in the furthest downstream node to which it can control and push trade value.

### Merchants[edit|edit source]

Colonial nationsof 10 provinces or more, ortrade companiesthat control 51% of trade in a trade company node, will provide the parent nation with an extramerchant. The merchant fromtrade companiesneeds theWealth of NationsDLC. These merchants are invaluable as not only do they provide+10%extratrade powerin the nation's home node whilesteeringtrade, but they also allow the nation to direct which direction to send trade in a node with multiple exits.

This second factor can make a significant difference in the amount oftrade valuea nation receives. Because of this, a player should prefer to place merchants in nodes with multiple exits, so that trade can be steered towards the nation's home node. Nations will always use all their trade power in any node to pull trade downstream, even without a merchant, unless a merchant iscollecting tradein that location. Therefore, any upstream nodes with only one exit will automatically pull in the correct direction.

Example:Spain has 2 merchants, and has colonized provinces in the Ivory Coast, Cape of Good Hope, Zanzibar and Malacca nodes. Spain should place the merchants in Malacca (to steer trade to the Cape of Good hope instead of Bengal) and Ivory Coast (to steer trade to Sevilla instead of Bordeaux, English Channel, or Caribbean). If Spain gets a 3rd merchant, placing it in either Zanzibar or Cape has similar effects, as Spain will get a+10%bonus to trade power regardless, and Zanzibar and Cape have only one exit. But themultiple merchant bonus, the+2trade power from a merchant ortrade policiesmight make one of these nodes more attractive than the other one.

### Institutions[edit|edit source]

For many nations in Asia, Africa and the New World, using colonization can be an effective way to get close to nations that have already embraced institutions, particularly Renaissance and Printing Press, which are guaranteed to spawn somewhere in Europe.

Of particular interest to colonizers is theColonialisminstitution. Not only does Colonialism have a chance to spawn in any nation that has both taken the Quest For the New World idea inExplorationand that has discovered the New World (Random or otherwise), but Colonialism will spread into any nation with a New World colonial nation, regardless of adjacency. This gives nations that begin colonizing before 1500 a significant advantage in regards to this institution.

Colonizing nations have some ability to affect the spawn point of theGlobal Tradeinstitution as well due to the amount of wealth that can flow from colonial nations and trade companies to the parent nation.

#### Island hopping[edit|edit source]

Early in the game when colonial range is short, island hopping is necessary in order to cross oceans large stretches of territory. Paying attention to Colonial Range can assist the player in reaching important provinces before AI nations, or finding the quickest way to adopt institutions by bordering appropriate nations.

A nation's base colonial range is 160 at diplomatic technology level 3 and 275 at diplomatic technology level 7. The 3rd idea inExploration, Overseas Exploration, gives+50%colonial range. Hiring a navigator advisor gives+20%colonial range.

Thus, the most important range numbers are 192, 272, and 467.5.

### The Random New World[edit|edit source]

If aRandom New Worldis generated, it is important that the player discover the newly generatedtrade nodesas soon as possible, as the flow of trade may be such that normally valuable trade nodes, such as Sevilla, may possibly receive notrade valuefrom the New World whatsoever. The player will have to adjust their colonization strategy to compensate for this, most likely focusing ontrade companiesand the static African and Asian colonizable areas instead.

Trade nodesin a random new world connect in some typical ways.  One (and only one) may connect to the following node or pair of nodes in the old world; North Sea and English Channel, Bordeaux and Seville, Safi and Ivory Coast, Girin and Nippon, or Australia.  The Philippines trade node may connect to one (and only one) trade node in a random new world to mirror the Philippines connection to the Mexico trade node in the standard version. All of the new world trade nodes will be interconnected coherently so that trade will always flow out of the new world and into the old.  In other words, there are no end nodes and no endless loops of trade within the new world.

Colonial Regionsin a random new world usually, but do not always, share the same boundaries as trade nodes.  In some map configurations, usually those with a large number of colonial regions, some provinces may not be in any colonial region but will remain with the first colonizer unless sold, lost in a war, or otherwise transferred.  Occasionally, again usually in those configurations with a large number of colonial regions, some colonial regions are too small to form colonial nations.

### Colonization strategies by technology group[edit|edit source]

Technology groupsare being used here primarily to identify the general location of a nation on the world map, as tech groups no longer have a direct effect on technology costs.

#### Western technology nations[edit|edit source]

Befitting their historical importance in this field, nations with their capitals in Western Europe have the potential for the most monetary gain from overseas territories.

European nations have a greater chance to be close to the spawning point of institutions, and so will be less vulnerable to falling behind in technology. This not only means that European nations may be able to unlockExplorationandExpansionideas more quickly than other nations, but it also means that their colonies will grow more quickly than other nations, will be more profitable, and will be protected more easily, due to higherdiplomatic technologylevel providing extra global settler increase, stronger navies, and moretrade powerand efficiency.

There is no territory in Europe to colonize, but any overseas colony can be just as valuable as a domestic province if they are part of astate. However, the maintenance cost of state membership and relative wealth of the location must be taken into account. In the case of trade company regions, in most cases Western nations will benefit more from creatingtrade companiesthan they will from taking control of the provinces directly, due to the significant bonuses provided to trade power andgoods produced. However, trade companies provide nomanpowernor taxes to the owner, whereas directly-controlled overseas states can still provide these resources.

Colonies incolonial regionswill, of course, be ceded to a formingcolonial nationonce five provinces are colonized, with all of the benefits and drawbacks of such.

In regards toInstitutions, Western European colonizer nations may possibly have the best access to Institution spread of all nations in the game. These nations will start withFeudalism, will have local access toRenaissanceandPrinting Pressdue to having a capital in Europe, and will have a good chance to spawnColonialismandGlobal Tradewithin their country. Even ifInstitutionslikeGlobal Trade,Manufactories, orEnlightenmenthave their source province overseas, a colonizer nation should easily be able to obtain at least some spread value from these locations, thanks to their global influence and the specific spread value triggers for certain institutions.

With the introduction of mission trees inRule Britanniathe historical colonizer nations can receive extra rewards for pursuing colonial expansion in either or both the old and new worlds.  These rewards can consist of benefits to trade, increased tariffs, additional development, faster settlement growth, reduced liberty desire in subjects, claims to certain regions, extra monarch power, and cash.

#### Eastern and Anatolian nations[edit|edit source]

For the most part,EasternandAnatoliantechnology nations receive few benefits from overseas colonization. To receive any significant trade value from either the New World or important trade nodes such as Malacca, the player will have to conquer extremely large portions of Asia, which may be impossible, impractical, or simply dull.

The onlyEasterntechnology nation that benefits substantially from colonization isMuscovy, or any nation that conquers them early on, such asNovgorodorLithuania. This is because it will allow the player to colonize the Siberia region, which can result in several free, remote, provinces with Gold as thetrade good. These provinces are best taken advantage of using the colonist from theExpansionidea group, notExploration. If the player can make it all the way to the Far East and can control the Hangzhou or Beijing nodes, they can route trade from limited areas of the New World, specifically California, Mexico and Rio Grande.

Even though a colonial nation can help to spawn or encourage the spread of theColonialisminstitution, Eastern technology nations are usually close enough to natural AI colonizers that they will get this institution relatively quickly regardless. In addition, these nations may have difficulty obtainingcolonial rangeto the New World, especially by 1500 when theColonialisminstitution is scheduled to appear.

Eastern Slavic nations are not required to take Exploration or Expansion ideas, as they will gain the"Siberian Frontier"ability once they form Russia, which allows them to establish a Siberian Frontier colony in any empty province with a direct land connection to its capital. This province will then grow by 5 to 15 colonists every month.

#### Muslim nations[edit|edit source]

Muslimtechnology nations only sometimes benefit from colonization; how much so depends on themain trade portof the nation in question, sinceMuslimnations can range across a wide area.

Nations near the Gulf of Aden or Hormuz may benefit from trade value produced in Indonesia, China or India, but keep in mind that a nation also cannot create a trade company on the same subcontinent as its capital, so keeping control ofCentres of Tradeis necessary. African or Asian nations may be forced to take direct control of overseas territory, via making the area astate, in order to compete with the trade company bonuses from Western powers.

Unless North African nations, such asMorocco, manage to control the Sevilla or Genoa nodes, these nations possibly derive the least benefit from colonization of any nation, as the trade route from Ivory Coast to Sevilla bypasses Safi. If aRandom New Worldis generated, trade value may sometimes flow through the Safi node, making colonization strategies for these nations viable. Even obtainingColonialismshould not be too difficult due to nearbyPortugalandSpain, though they will likely be hostile, reducing the spread rate significantly.

#### Indian nations[edit|edit source]

Nations in theIndiantechnology group are part of Asia and as such have much quicker access to the rich provinces in Indonesia, and can easily pulltradefrom these provinces back to Bengal, Ceylon, or Goa. Due to the trade flow, nations in Doab, Kashmir or Lhasa benefit very little from overseas territory, but these nations should move theirmain trade portsto better downstream nodes as quickly as is convenient. Unfortunately, trade companies are next to useless for Indian nations due to the worldwide flow of trade; African trade value cannot be routed back to Indian nodes, and trade companies cannot be created on the same continent as a nation's capital.

Obtaining or even spawningColonialismcan be difficult for Indian nations as they may have difficulty obtaining colonial range to the New World, even when takingExplorationideas first. Later on, colonization may be useful in order to border Western nations, in order to obtain institution spread from them.

#### Chinese nations and Steppe Hordes[edit|edit source]

Chinesetechnology nations exist exclusively in Asia, and so can receive decent benefits from colonizing the Indonesian regions, as well as creating a colonial nation in Australia. However, due to the trade flow in this area, no trade from the Philippines, the Moluccas, Australia or Malacca can be pulled back to the upstream nodes (Siam, Canton, Hangzhou, Beijing) where most of these nations reside. Most mainlandChinesenations (includingSteppe Hordes) that wish to focus on trade should move theirmain trading portto the Malacca node once they can reasonably control that node. Bengal is also an alternative location that may be easier for some nations to control.

Chinesenations that are lucky enough to start in Indonesia, such asPasai,BruneiorMalacca, often receive Colonists in theirnational ideasand benefit immensely from colonization, not only by grabbing the rich domestic territory in Indonesia, but also by preventing European colonizers from taking territory in the region. Colonial nations in California, Australia, Rio Grande, and Mexico can also send trade value to Indonesian trade nodes.

Steppe Hordes, or far east nations such asKoreaorJapan, can use early colonization to take the uncolonized provinces in Siberia, which can contain Gold as well as limit the power ofMuscovyif necessary. A northern nation controlling the Beijing or Hangzhou nodes can receive trade value from limited areas of the New World, specifically California, Rio Grande and Mexico, which makes colonial nations in this area beneficial. After defeatingMuscovyor Persian nations, moving trade capital to either the Novgorod or the Persia trade node can be very interesting, as these nodes allow to siphon value from both Indonesia and the New world up to the Cuiaba node. When playing nations likeKazanorGreat Horde, defeating Muscovy is a priority early on anyway, and therefore later on, moving either the capital or the trade capital to the Novgorod node can be advisable.

With aRandom New World,Chinesenations andSteppe Hordesmay sometimes find large amounts of trade in the New World flowing to Girin, Japan, the Phillippines, the Moluccas or even Australia, making colonial nations even more useful in these cases.

All of these nations can use colonization to great benefit when obtainingInstitutions, particularlyColonialismandGlobal Trade. Australia is a viable colonial nation.

#### Western, Eastern and Central African nations[edit|edit source]

These nations can derive great benefits from colonization, but there are risks involved due to the tendency of major European colonizers to focus on this area. There are many empty provinces in this area as well as around Africa itself that can be colonized, but all African nations face great danger if a European power declares war on them for this territory.

If some control of the Ivory Coast trade node can be secured, Western African nations can benefit fromcolonial nationswith provinces in the Brazil, Amazonas, Rio de la Plata, Cuiaba or Patagonia trade nodes. Ivory Coast also receives trade, either directly or indirectly, from nearly all of Asia as well as Australia, California, Mexico, and Rio Grande. Eastern and Central African nations, due to their location at or near the Zanzibar node, are capable of pulling trade from Indonesian provinces directly to their doorstep through Malacca, which can be very profitable indeed. However, African nations will only be able to createtrade companiesin Asia.

If aRandom New Worldis generated, substantially more (or less) trade value may flow into Ivory Coast, making the node more (or less) valuable to control.

Colonialismcan be very easy to spawn or spread into Western African nations that takeExploration, due to their proximity to South America.

#### Native North and South American nations[edit|edit source]

As these nations usually start with very few provinces in an area with large amounts of empty territory, colonization is essential to playing these nations. All North and South American nations can receive a bonus colonist through either their religious or government reform track, which can assist in obtaining as many provinces as possible.Nahuatl,MayanorIntinations will keep the bonus colonist even after reforming, as long as they keep their pagan religion.

Migratory nations can easily migrate to controlCentres of TradeorEstuariesin their trade node of choice before commencing colonization, but this may put the nation in danger later in the game, as European colonizers prefer centers of trade over any other provinces, and may declare war to obtain one.

In general, colonizing towards the east coast of North or South America will result in quicker modernization in tech, but also comes with a greater risk of invasion by European powers before the player is prepared. Colonizing to the west will be in most cases safer, but may result in high technology costs for most of the game. If a North or South American native has finished their appropriate government or religious reform track, simply bordering any nation with adopted Institutions will allow that nation to reform their government or religion, getting a massive boost in technology and adopting all institutions in the adjacent nation instantly, so colonization to obtain one of these borders (when the time comes) is higher recommended. However, further institution spread (after the initial boost) may be difficult to obtain.

Once a native nation's borders have expanded sufficiently, the player will want to move the nation'smain trading portas far downstream as is reasonable, as many trade nodes in North or South America are source nodes, or have a single preceding node, and thus are very poor. In terms of overseas territory, nations with their main trading port in Panama can pull trade value from the Phillippines as well as nodes upstream of this, such as Hangzhou. Most interestingly of all, nations with a main trading port in the Caribbean can pull trade from all of South America, most of North America, most of Africa, and nearly all of southern Asia, as the Caribbean node can pull trade from Ivory Coast or Panama. This makes the Caribbean by far the best home node for a nation in North or South America, but it may be very difficult to control.

Nations with their capitals in North or South America cannot formcolonial nationsin any region (not even Australia). Colonies that would normally be ceded tocolonial nationswill remain as regular provinces instead and can be added tostatesto receive the full benefit from such provinces.

In aRandom New World, the player should inspect their chosen nation to see if they can reasonably be played. Many Native nations generated in a Random New World are located on small, isolated islands, or smaller landmasses that have no uncolonized territory. This means that the player will be trapped on their land mass, as they cannot yet colonize over water. It will also mean thatNative Councils, or nations ofNahuatl,IntiorMayanreligion, will never be able to border a nation with an Institution,  and so will not be able to reform. For American religious pagans, an absence of ownable territory or vassalizable nations may prevent the player from reforming their religion entirely.

When selecting a nation in aRandom New World, either select an appropriate native nation on a large land mass with plenty of uncolonized territory, or select (or customize) a nation is not aNative Council, or that is not an unreformedNahuatl,MayanorIntination.
